Sometimes about 35.
Before that time, where did youngsters from the campus go to school?
I don't know.
Probably went to prime.
Did you ever hear any discussion about how it was financed?
That I'm not familiar with.
Because there wouldn't have been any school taxes on the campus folks.
That's correct.
Well, actually, there may have been in time, I know, because I think Dad was on the Equalization Board one time, and some people attempted not to pay taxes because they were on campus.
But I think that eventually that they did, everyone paid taxes on and off campus.
When you're beginning your first grade, how many, was it grades 1 through 11 all on campus?
That's correct.
Now the,
Grade school and elementary levels were in the music hall, and the high school was in Pfeiffer Hall, which was the oldest building on campus when I was a student.
It was built in 1887, and I actually had, not as a high school student, but as a college student, courses in that building, physiology and some pre-med courses.
The teachers, the faculty of the elementary and high school, were any of those university faculty members, or were they all full-time teachers?
Well, they were full-time teachers.
Now, many of these teachers were the wives of professors.
And some of the teachers eventually moved on up to NM, particularly during World War II when there was a faculty shortage at NM.
We had good teachers and kind, considerate people, too.
Describe some that you remember most warmly.
Well, Mrs. Salmon was a very warm person.
And, of course, she was my first grade teacher.
And Mrs. Simms was my second grade teacher.
She was a quieter person who was very comfortable to be around.
And I recall one of the highlights of my second grade year was when Dr. Mangelsdorf brought... He was a...
a plant physiologist, I presume, had a PhD, who later went to Yale as a member of their faculty.
But he brought in many, many cuttings of various things.
It was very interesting to see the flowers and the leaves and so forth.
It was one of those memorable things you remember.
My third grade teacher was Mrs. Holzman.
I think her brother-in-law was the controller at NM.
She was a very warm, nice person.
Both in the second and third grade, I had pneumonia.
And in those years, you didn't go back to school the next day.
I missed the last six weeks of school as a second grader.
And all of three months as a third grader, and during that time Mrs. Brownlee, whose husband was on the faculty at Allen Academy, tutored me to keep me up with my class.
And Mrs. Lomax was my fourth grade teacher.
She was a more business-like teacher.
Have I heard of her husband?
I don't know.
I know there was a Lomax at the University of Texas at one time.
Was that John Lomax?
I don't know.
The folklorist?
What's that?
I don't know.
Because he passed through here during that period.
There was a Lomax on the faculty making tremendously important recordings of folk music.
Yes.
Well, I presume it may have been, because she would have been probably in her 30s at that time.
She was a stricter teacher than the other three.
Give some examples of strict discipline during that time.
What were you all not allowed to do?
Well, I wouldn't say so much that, but she didn't tolerate unruliness in class, let's put it that way.
And I don't think anybody got a spanking or anything, but I think that she verbally handled it in a way that kept us in mind.
You and your buddies, what would have been examples of the kind of mischief you all might have attempted?
You know, I guess it was just what little boys and girls do when they're that age.
I don't remember anything specifically out of order.
I can remember later that two of my
male classmates who would never stop talking.
I remember that, and I can recall one who later became a college professor getting a D in deportment.
I will not mention his name.
Let's see.
Did y'all, either then or a little later, did you throw spit wads?
Did you have rubber bands that you would shoot little?
That was part of the process, yes.
I think the most memorable event along the spitball line was when my brother and I were ill one time, and I guess recovering enough not to be just moribund.
Mother and dad were at some social event one afternoon, and it was Sunday, and that was the one day a week that Ruby, our maid, was not there.
And so we were allowed to supervise ourselves on this occasion, and we made little tubes of, maybe we had straws to drink our ginger ale with or something.
And we were lying on our beds and we were shooting them up to the ceiling.
And of course there was enough saliva in the spitball to leave a little halo around.
The spitball might fall off after time, but the halo didn't.
And so month and day had returned home to a ceiling with a great deal of modern art involved.
And I remember that our illness did not prevent a little bit of reprimand physically at that point.
Did y'all first attempt to deny any knowledge of how it came about?
I think it was a little too obvious.
Let's see.
At school, did it matter among you and your friends, did it matter what the A&M College
status was of your parents?
The fact that so-and-so was the child of a dean or a full professor, did that matter?
I don't think we were too aware of that.
I do think this, that we tended to be a little bit tribal.
And, for example, if you were from Bryan, you were Bryan Bratt.
Oh, is that nickname used?
Bryan Bratt, okay.
And here I live in Bryan now, so I've had to make some adjustments throughout, you know, as an adult.
But we really, it was a nice environment to live in, and we were, all of us were practically in the same grade for 11 years, and we knew each other, and I think we were rather tribal.
And I'm assuming that one of the unacceptable
bits of behavior would have been for somebody to have failed, but that would have... Yes.
A youngster just wouldn't let that happen.
That's right.
You know, I was not too aware of that until a little later on.
But in high school, we were aware that you just didn't fail.
You know, in the early grades, we were not too aware of that part.
In the lingo of my growing up, but I mean, if you weren't fairly intelligent, it wasn't too acceptable.
Sure.
In the lingo of my growing up, we would talk about slipping off from home and going to do something.
If you all slipped off from home,
and went to do something when, say, you were junior high, where did you slip off and go to?
Gosh, I hadn't even thought of that.
I was, in junior high school, we were beginning to, you know, have our little athletic teams, and I was not a great athlete, and
probably not as motivated as my brother, but I was a member of all the teams.
And, you know, you were involved in your class activities, and we had, beginning at that junior high school level, parties and so forth, and in parents' homes and at the Girl Scout Lodge in Bryan.
We had a lot of activities of that sort.
As a younger child, all of us looked forward to going to the college pool to swim in the summer.
That was always a
Because I understand you could get a family pass.
I think Bill Lancaster told me it was $3 a summer.
I heard someone else say that.
I was not even aware that it was all just sort of taken care of as far as I was.
I wasn't aware of paying for it.
But I remember one of the big pleasures was to drop a penny in the deep end of the pool and see if we could get down to that level and retrieve it, you know.
Did you all go play at the little lake on the south of the campus?
That little pond?
I can only remember going down to the lake a few times.
We had a fairly contained environment and a lot of youngsters our age, at least my age, on campus.
In fact, I was playing more with children, you know, several youngsters at the second house we lived in from 1935 to 40.
40 or 41.
And it was a neighborhood of all boys.
The Gammons lived next to us, two sons, and Leland's on the other side, a son and a daughter, and Williams behind us was son and daughter, and Walker's sort of across the street in the next block.
two sons, and Bill Echols, who was Dean Bolton's grandson, spent a great deal of time all summer with us in College Station.
And so we just were doing everything from having acorn flights to... The gammons were a little older than we were.
And Billy, the older son, was very inventive.
And he developed what we called a Farquhar cannon.
It was a foot or so, maybe longer, of plumbing-type pipe that was capped on the end with the cap pad.
had a hole drill in it so you could put a firecracker wick through it and then through the other end of the barrel you put an acorn and this would blast an acorn out and it ignited and the firecracker ignited.
One of the events I remember in particular was that
Billy and I were in the little house behind the gunman's house that they'd converted into a sort of a storeroom and maybe a place for the boys to
do a little carpentry or something.
And we were in that building and firing our firecracker cannon out through an open window.
And Sam Ray and all the other boys, the rest of the neighborhood boys, had a gigantic piece of plywood.
And Sam Ray had one finger
exposed, and that hand was holding the plywood so they'd be protected from our weapon.
And believe it or not, our acorn hit his finger, and of course their fortification collapsed.
And I always said that I think that's what moved Sam Ray toward diplomacy.
You know, he later became a diplomat and an ambassador.
But he didn't follow the military life at least.
Let's see, did y'all have BB guns?
Yes, they were a big bunch.
And you used them on campus?
Yes, we were shot at the little birds that couldn't get out of the way fast enough.
Rubber guns?
I don't remember rubber guns.
Yes, they were there, but I mean that was, I think I went from the firecracker cannon and acorn flights to the BB gun and missed the rubber.
You youngsters, did you ever ride your bikes and go to the gravel pits swimming where the cadets, where the corps members would swim?
We rode our bikes to White's Canyon.
Where's that?
White's Canyon is southwest of College Station a few miles.
It's an eroded area south of where the airport is, probably a mile or so.
And the big attraction to White's Canyon was you could slide down the sides, especially if it were a little bit wet.
And that was fun because it was enough to really have a nice slide.
And I can remember riding the bike with a friend or so out to the Brazos River.
We had gotten the idea we wanted to uncover some archaeological specimens out there, but we didn't find any fossils.
But we did ride out.
But on campus, a place that we really enjoyed riding our bicycles to was the administration building area, the terraced area.
And I think the administration building went in about 35 or so.
And it was fun to go down the terraced
gradations, and then coming back, you'd have to put your front wheel up to get over the four or five inches of drop-off.
Now, say when the, what we used to call the system administration building, now the Jack Kenny Williams building, when it was built facing east, a new Texas Avenue, new Highway 6, what did that
Physically, what did that area look like where the bonfire is now held and where the golf course now is?
What did it look like then?
This was agricultural land.
And the, just to the north of the, is it the Jack K. Williams building?
The old systems building.
Just down the hill to the north was the College of Veterinary Medicine.
Previously, the College of Veterinary Medicine had been about a block from the Cushing Library in the early years.
As a very, very young child, I can remember going through the original building, someone was showing me the jar specimens of all their unusual things.
I remember that event.
But by the middle 1930s, the vet school, veterinary school, was just north of the systems building, maybe 300 or 400 yards.
And behind that, north of that and also east of that was, these were just pastures.
And the College of the Animal Huntsmanry
area in the College of Agriculture had the land, I guess you'd say, south of the Systems Administration Building.
Where the golf course is now.
And that was pasture also?
Yes.
My dad said that when he first came here in the early 1920s, he could go out on the south
east corner of this agricultural land and shoot, get a full limit of dove by time to go to the office.
You mentioned maid that your family had for a long time.
What's that?
You mentioned family maid.
Yes.
Where did she live?
Essentially, all the campus houses had a small house, a servant's house behind the house.
And our maid lived there.
Our maid was...
Ruby McWilliams, a very wonderful person, very obese, loved food and loved to cook, and just was a sweet person.
She was with us until the exodus of many people to California during the war.
Now, was she black or white?
Black.
Where did she grow up?
She grew up in Bryan.
And many maids on the campus were black.
Did any of them have children who were school age?
Yes.
Her son was older than we were, and of course, in those years, the schools were segregated, as you know.
But Benny was a little older, and incidentally, Benny became a college graduate.
Good, good.
Now, where was, where did they go to school?
He went to school in Bryan somewhere.
In Bryan.
But I don't, I presume in the Kemp system.
And was there a school bus that came to pick them up?
Well, actually, he was old enough so that he was not, didn't live with his mama.
Oh, I see.
And you don't have any idea what the compensation was for a maid in the 30s?
Well, a mother used to proudly say she paid $1 more a month, a week, or whatever it was, than anyone else.
But it was something like $6 a week.
Of course, they had their house and they had their meals.
So they had really more, in other words.
But it was minimal.
And I have always said, based on my very limited observation, the close, close relations between black and white southerners in those situations were so meaningful.
And that your respect...
for that person, that individual, was very, very high.
Exactly.
And I'm assuming when your mother was not there,
Ruby was there ordinarily, yes.
And she was in charge.
Except on Sundays, yes.
And that if Ruby gave you a direction, you knew to follow it, or you might have to explain it to your mother.
That's true, but Ruby was such a nice person, it was really, she had a hard time being too authoritarian.
But we, I think we responded, we did what we were supposed to do, yeah.
All right, let's reach back now and pick up your father's career.
He and your mother got married in the mid-twenties and at that point his responsibilities were what?
My dad was the freshman coach for five years.
For football.
Football and basketball.
And basketball.
DX Bible was a basketball coach, and both Dad and DX Bible were football people.
And Dad once said that the only thing that he and DX Bible knew about basketball was to throw the ball up and get out of the way.
Being five feet seven inches tall, I guess that wasn't a bad idea anyway.
But they had great teams.
DX Bible's teams won the conference championship.
And believe it or not, one year, Dad's freshman football basketball team beat the Sam Houston team two times, and the Sam Houston team came over and beat the N.M.
Varsity one out of two times.
And that was a Southwest Conference champion team, and the freshman team beat the team that beat them.
In those years, where was basketball played?
It was played in DeWare Fieldhouse.
DeWare was already there.
Yes.
Now, there was an older wooden structure west of the P.L.
Downs Natatorium that was still in existence.
And I presume it may have been where the basketball was played prior to DeWare Fieldhouse being built.
Now, an interesting story, this is more related to football and baseball, is this.
Dad said that when he came here in 1920 and in those earlier years, that the football stadium, at the end of football season, it was a wooden structure.
It was dismantled.
and moved over to the baseball area.
And then it became the baseball stadium during spring, and then it was moved back, presumably in the summer, to the football field.
So it was one stadium, but two different locations.
But it was wooden and could be dismantled.
Now, your mentioning of the stadium caused me to think of the name Kyle.
Was Dean Kyle around in your memory?
Yes.
Dean Kyle graduated sometime in the early 1900s, and I think he had a master's degree, as I remember.
and was headed the, at least by the time I could remember it, was dean of agriculture.
And he was also, in the 1920s, I think, chairman of the athletic council and the faculty of the athletic council.
Was it called Kyle Field in your early memories?
From my time on, yes.
I don't know exactly when it was named Kyle Field, but that was in the 1920s, in the middle 20s, in the late 20s, that's when the concrete stadium began.
I think it was built in two different parts.
And he was Dr. Dean Kyle was very, probably headed the council at that time.
At least the first position.
All right.
Your dad did freshman on football.
He coached freshman football, but I presume that also meant
When the varsity played, he was there as a member of the staff on Saturday to help with those games, too.
Well, actually, he, no, he scouted other teams.
Oh, so he'd be on the road then?
Mm-hmm.
So, I guess the freshman games were on Friday or the day before the varsity games.
And in fact, in his five years of coaching, they lost, A&M freshman teams lost only two football games.
And I've looked through some yearbooks, and the one loss record then was remarkable.
And of course, the varsity record was great too.
Probably the greatest athlete that was on dad's freshman football team was Joel Hunt, who the early teams in the early 20s, I think the A&M
football teams that were winning were balanced teams.
And in the middle 20s, thanks to Joel Hunt, A&M won two Southwest Conference championships in football.
But those teams were not as probably quite as well balanced and they depended more on his excellence.
And one of the problems A&M began to face
in those years was as the two city schools, SMU and Rice, began developing aspirations athletically, they became active in recruiting.
And the ex-Bible did not believe in recruiting.
In those years, obviously, to remain a successful coach, he did change as time went on.
At first, he did not.
But A&M did not do, did not really actively recruit, and so these other teams began to pull up.
And as I say, the reason that A&M won those two championships, I think in 25 and 27 in football, was more of the individual brilliance of this guy.
Joel Hunt.
Where did Hunt grow up?
Do you remember?
Hunt, where was he from?
He was, I believe, a Waco boy.
Do you remember any stories your dad passed on about recruiting in the 20s?
how they did it?
Frankly, I don't think they did much recruiting in those years.
A&M did have an invitational track meet for high school boys that was a casualty of the repression, but that way at least a high school track and field man could get on campus and see what was here.
Recruiting us, in my dad's experience, really was not something that was actually actively done until he returned to track and field coaching after World War II.
So that youngster came here literally on his own.
Correct.
Did they get scholarships?
No.
By the late 1920s, to be competitive with some of the other schools, athletes were given waiter's jobs, but they worked.
Okay.
Let's sidetrack on that.
How often did you all eat in Cebiza, you as a family?
Practically never.
So you ate it, ate almost all your meals at home?
Correct.
Yeah.
Was that unusual for the faculty families?
I think that was true generally.
The mess hall was
And incidentally, Dad said that the man for whom it was named was from Switzerland, I believe.
But he pronounced it Spisa.
Now, everybody at NM, all the cadets would call it Sabisa or something.
Did he ever pass on any anecdotes about that man?
No, he didn't, but I remember Mr. Duncan, for whom Duncan Hall was named, he was a very white-haired person, rather florid complexion.
I remember once Dad had
to go to the mess hall for something to talk to Mr. Duncan.
And Mr. Duncan, I was along with Dad.
And so he had me stop by the sweet roll area.
And he gave me more sweet rolls than I could eat in a month, I think.
My memory was that he was a very kind person.
And the reputation of the quality of the food then was high?
I think it was high.
See, it was mainly a cadet corps mess hall, and I don't think there was anything really set up for
for other than that except for faculty dinners, and I presume other dinners.
But I think there was always at least one annual faculty dinner.
All right.
And Coach Bible leaves to go to Nebraska.
Do you remember any, do you ever hear any stories about why he left?
Did they pay him that much more money or?
I think he felt it was a strategic time to leave because it was apparent that with the other teams recruiting and AIM not.
And AIM also had a tremendous disadvantage in recruiting because a lot of good students and good athletes did not want to be a cadet.
Because after all, it was an involuntary system that you had to be a cadet.
And so if you were sought after academically or sought after athletically and you were courted by other schools,
then A&M had a disadvantage, plus the fact that, as I mentioned, A&M did not recruit anyway.
And the point was, I think the ex-bible could see that if his two last championship teams had not had a super athlete, that they would have been in the middle of the conference.
And I think he felt that this was
It would be to his career advantage to be at a school that had a fine tradition athletically.
As far as you know, he did not, there was no bitterness or rancor.
Absolutely none, no.
And he left entirely of his own?
Correct, yeah.
Now does your dad's?
In fact, I think that the Athletic Council agreed to meet his salary.